+++
title = "The Eternal-Temporal Dialectic in Whitehead's Metaphysics (feat. George Allan)"
date = 2022-04-11
draft = false
[taxonomies]
tags = ["Whitehead", "eternity", "time", "form"]
+++

George Allan\'s most recent book, _Whitehead's Radically Temporalist
Metaphysics: Recovering the Seriousness of Time_ (2020), has recently
come to my attention. Before reading it, I have looked into some of his
essays. (I understand the book itself is a collection of essays, so I
may well be reading the book\'s earlier drafts.) One, \"Diagrams and
Myths,\" is in the recent edited volume _Whitehead at Harvard:
1924--1925_. The other is \"A Functionalist Reinterpretation of
Whitehead\'s Metaphysics\" (_The Review of Metaphysics_ 62, 2008).
Reading them has prompted a return to some of Whitehead\'s concepts
pertaining to time, form, and originality.

Consider three actual occasions: A, B, and C. A is in the actual world
of B; and both A and B are in the actual world of C. Thus, A precedes B,
and both precede C. In our cosmic epoch, we are inclined to suppose that
this means A, B, and C are temporally ordered such that C only has
access to through B\'s prior access to A. (Whitehead would, I think, say
A is \"included in\" B rather than use the word \"access.\") However,
this temporal ordering depends on C having felt all actual occasions in
its actual world via the physical prehension of its totality. The order
of entities according to both the extensive continuum in its ultimate
generality and the more specialized social order of C\'s background
cosmic epoch is a consequent result of C\'s concrescence of those
entities. Their order does not precede C but, rather, depends on C\'s
aesthetic synthesis for its perpetually renewed existence as objective
datum for the creative advance. To be sure, there is a massiveness of
valuation that practically ensures the reenaction of their order. But in
terms of ultimate metaphysical generality, all that can be presupposed
is their common availability to C, that is, their like inclusion in C\'s
actual world.

What I am driving at is a suspicion that George Allan cannot decide, at
least based on the internal coherence of Whitehead\'s philosophy,
whether there is an eternal Past that is temporally modified or whether
there is just the inherence of the past insofar as it conditions novel
immediacy. While I am sympathetic to Allan\'s move to \"take time
seriously,\" and I do find, of those two options, that the latter makes
more sense within the philosophy of organism, I do wonder whether it
necessarily forecloses the former option. Instead, it may explain it. To
be sure, the primordial actuality God should have no place in _Process
and Reality_ because it contravenes those lectures\' metaphysical
principles. On this point, I agree with Allan. But let us remain with
the ontological status of satisfaction, because that is the core issue
of which God is a derivative proposal.

To be is to be potential for every future becoming. This is Whitehead\'s
principle of relativity, the flipside of which is the ontological
principle: no actual entity, then no reason. The past cannot be
everlasting because of process\'s character of perpetual perishing. That
is essential to the temporal nature of actuality. The superject persists
qua real potentiality \"thus appropriated\" (and again: \"selectively
appropriated\") by a novel becoming (_PR_ 219, 233). It does not perdure
in some eternal receptacle.

Allan levies these points against Whitehead\'s assertion that there must
be some Eternal aspect to reality, without which novel entities would
neither be conditioned by antecedent occasions nor even come into
existence in the first place. \"Whitehead\'s solution is to ground it in
an Eternal receptacle, a reality that is not itself temporal but is able
to sustain the things of the past, and to do so in a way that makes it
possible for them to have an impact, to perish and yet to live
forevermore\" (304). I agree with Allan that this is neither necessary
nor consistent with Whitehead\'s philosophy of organism. However, I
disagree with Allan that Whitehead means by the \"Eternal\" an atemporal
receptacle into which all satisfactions rest. Or at least, that is not
all he can mean given the centrality of both the settled world and
eternal objects to his account of the atomic becoming of continuity. I
agree with Allan that the temporal aspect of actuality is integral and
sufficient for Whitehead\'s metaphysics. Yet I also contend that there
is an eternal aspect bound up with the temporal, without which the
temporal would not make sense.

What does it mean that actual entities are temporal? It means that
actual entities never again become; their felt data are dis-unified in
the selective appropriation of the actual world, \"in other words
\'objectified,\'\" so as to be re-unified as novel feelings in the
process of concrescence (233). The crux of the problem pertains to which
occasions are included in a novel entity\'s actual world. Whitehead
insists on the totality of the settled world being available; but that
what qualifies as an actual world is that world as felt by the final
satisfaction.

Thus, any one percipient occasion that contributed yesterday to the
enduring object that is my conscious, living personality is not, to my
knowledge at least, directly felt in any of its feelings as constituting
my actual world; it is re-enacted via a chain of entities, what
Whitehead calls a \"historic route\" of occasions. While the entity
itself is not recreated, enough of its pattern of feeling is integrated
into a novel unity of experience. However, that past percipient occasion
must be neither more nor less a component condition on the novel
immediacy of the most recent percipient occasion than any other.
Satisfaction does not admit of degrees in some absolute sense of
succession. That would require positing an absolute Time, an Eternal
receptacle that keeps track of when occasions became.

But so, too, would the assumption that only the most \"recently,\" so to
speak, satisfied occasions compose the settled world\'s real
potentiality for novel becoming---this would also presuppose an Eternal
receptacle that has the sole function of determining the cutting off
point between satisfaction, condition, and final perishing beyond which
its role as conditioning element is replaced by a relatively more novel
occasion. Rejecting an Eternal as receptacle in favor of only the most
recent actual occasions merely constrains the function of that
receptacle; it does not refute it. The reason for this comes from my
presentation above of entities A, B, and C. Whether entity A precedes B
is a matter for the feelings contributive to C\'s satisfaction to
_decide_. There is no absolute determination outside of a temporal
actual entity\'s self-determination, and this applies to everything, not
only to temporal succession. The intuitive assumption that A must
precede B, and that A is felt by C only through B\'s own feelings of A,
is not a metaphysically general case but an achievement owing to the
real potentiality of this cosmic epoch\'s social order. Metaphysically
considered, just because A is in B\'s actual world and not vice versa
does not preclude C from feeling A either directly or as not mediated
through B\'s feelings of A. To be sure, B\'s feelings of A, as part of
the real internal constitution of B (B\'s \"formal reality\"), must be
taken into account; but they can be negatively prehended. Any claims to
the contrary---e.g. that even were C to feel A with a temporal order
_after_ B, it would not change the facts of A and B---depend on another
actuality, let\'s say D, that feels A, B, and C (and perhaps a
contemporary of C\'s, C1). And the conditions for entity D do not differ
with regard to A and B but only with regard to C (and all of C\'s
contemporaries that have perished) being potential for its becoming. To
say otherwise is to impose an Eternal receptacle in which all past
occasions subsist in static order, offered up everlastingly to novel
creatures.

Yet, there is one insistent detail that prevents this cosmological
picture from devolving into an arbitrary tale of caprice. What then is
impossible in our scenario? It is impossible for C to negatively prehend
A\'s inclusion of B in its actual world, since that is just not an
option provided by the matters of fact. So perhaps there is a sense of
metaphysically general succession to be garnered from the ineluctable
matter of fact that B includes A in its actual world but not vice versa.
While it may be felt otherwise, the negative prehension will nonetheless
qualify that positive feeling of A as not prior to B. Not to be left out
is Whitehead\'s own pragmatic recurrence to pre-Kantian modes of
thought, including pre-skeptical naive realism: we experience the world
as having a strict sequence in time. This sequentiality must have its
basis in the \"concrete procession of reality itself\" (HL1; qtd. in
Allan 303). It is never the case that C\'s potential for directly
feeling A has only B to contend with; there is a multitude of occasions,
many of which were contemporaries of B, for which A is included in their
actual worlds. My concern is with the legitimacy of generalizing that
sequentiality from the massiveness of realization in our cosmic epoch to
metaphysical generality. In _Process and Reality_, Whitehead does assert
that an actual entity necessitates a successive entity, though it does
not necessitate a preceding occasion. (I would argue that the necessity
of consequent entities implies the necessity of antecedent occasions.)
Is this enough to attribute to Whitehead\'s philosophy a metaphysical
presupposition of absolute temporal order? Well, he does give
difficult-to-parse hypotheticals, along the lines of my own case with
entities A, B, and C, which resist that assumption. But that cannot be
the same as \"the individual independence of successive
\'perceptions,\'\" which Whitehead criticizes in modern philosophy and
science as the fallacy of simple location (_PR_ 137). Indeed it is not
the same. Paraphrasing Locke, feeling is \"_determine\[d\] to this or
that particular existence_\" (see Locke\'s _Treatise_, Bk. I, Part I,
Sect. II; qtd. in _PR_ 138). That is not the same as guaranteeing a
\"most recently satisfied\" set of occasions as potential for becoming.
They are potential for _every_ becoming and not, to paraphrase Allan,
potential for only those \"immediate successors.\"

Let\'s briefly touch base with Allan\'s purely temporal interpretation.
Allan argues for a \"sequential transmission of influence,\" which he
attributes to what Whitehead calls in his first year of lectures at
Harvard \"strain\[s\] of conditioning (of control)\" (HL1, 31; qtd. in
Allan 303). \"A past occasion has its own past, of course. The
conditions its shadow imposed on each of its nascent immediate
successors were shaped by the shadows its immediate predecessors imposed
on it, and similarly for the predecessors of those predecessors, ad
infinitum\" (Allan 302). But the determination of \"immediate
successor\" is a decision to be made in the concrescence of those
successors. I wonder whether Allan\'s solution might be a sleight of
hand that depends on our familiarity with temporal succession according
to the historic routes of occasions that constitute our cosmic epoch. He
privileges a kind of actual entity he deems an \"immediate
predecessor,\" when what he ought to consider is the belonging to actual
worlds. Immediacy of precedence is part of real potentiality, a pattern
of definiteness upon which a novel concrescence decides. The
metaphysical analog, or basis, to temporal distance is the inclusion in
many occasions\' actual worlds.

If there isn\'t a function of immediate precedence baked into
concrescence, then how does a Whiteheadian metaphysics avoid recourse to
an interpretation of the settled world as an Eternal receptacle? The
answer to that question must apply equally to those occasions in an
actual world that do not also belong to the actual world of another
occasion (this is entity \"B\" in my example) as well as to those
occasions that do belong to nested actual worlds (this is entity \"A\").
I think the solution needs to recognize the validity of the eternal not
as a \"ground,\" as Allan shows is sometimes the case for Whitehead, but
as an integral aspect of the temporal: namely, the sense in which forms
or potentials are eternal. (Just to be clear: I pretty much agree with
Allan\'s \"functionalist interpretation\" of Whitehead\'s process
philosophy.) Whitehead prefers the novel term \"eternal object\" for
these forms because it is unlikely to be confused for concepts
associated with extant terminology (like form, _eidos_, ideas, concepts)
and because it captures the function played by this \"type of
existence\" (_PR_ 22). The eternal object plays a \"two-way rôle\" as
mediator between perished and final fact of feeling, on the one hand,
and the becoming unity of feeling, on the other hand.

It is eternal because it is not determined to a particular existence; it
is ideal (like logical generalities, rules, concepts, etc.). By
\"determined to a particular existence,\" I do not mean to say that an
eternal object _is_ apart from its ingression in actual occasions (more
on this below). Rather, for potential to transition from satisfied
occasion to novel entity, it must be capable of abstraction _from_ any
particular existence. An eternal object names that component aspect of
actuality which can recur, which can be extricated from the singular
unity of a concrescence. It is what remains the same across contingent
facts and thus what affords the possibility of change across singular
novelties.

On this point, I differ with Allan in an interpretation of a passage
from _PR_: \"Any entity whose conceptual recognition does not involve a
necessary reference to any definite actual entities of the temporal
world is called an \'eternal object\'\" (44). Allan, in his 2008 essay
\"A Functionalist Reinterpretation of Whitehead\'s Metaphysics,\" takes
this definition to imply a non-temporal receptacle of the totality of
eternal objects (331). He says: \"An eternal object need never be
actualized, but should it be it may then recur.\" I disagree. The key
word to focus on in Whitehead\'s sentence is \"necessary.\" Whitehead is
not saying that absolutely _no_ reference occurs to definite actual
entities; he says only that no particular reference is _necessary_. The
eternal object is that entity felt in such a way that it does not
necessitate reference to one definite actual entity. That is the whole
point of conceptual valuation (the fourth categoreal obligation, though
I find the fifth, which is conceptual reversion, to be necessary as
well). There is no separate set of eternal objects here, subsisting
timelessly. They are not \"real\" in and of themselves. All eternal
objects are derived from actuality, from the temporal world (this is
Dewey\'s proposal, which Allan takes up). They are the metaphysically
general case of \"derivative abstraction.\" Their reality always depends
upon concrescence and does not presuppose a non-temporal, timeless world
as counterpart to the temporal world of definite actual entities. Nor
does it presuppose a primordial actual entity. (I agree with Allan\'s
critique of such a primordial actual entity, and I would further say
that Whitehead reconceptualizes eternal objects to fit with it; he does
not derive God from them by the necessity of their concept.)

The significance of the \"object\" side of the term means that the
eternal object\'s eternity is not a self-subsistent Being, but always
ingressed as the forms of feelings determined to this or that existence.
It is an object because of its intractable participatory status in
actuality. In order to be at all, an eternal object must provide the
medium of objectification (physical prehensions) and be objectified (via
conceptual and hybrid prehensions). There is no grounding eternity that
transcends temporal entities; nor is there an oxymoronic temporalization
of eternity (i.e. the dual natures of God in Part V of _Process and
Reality_). Instead, there is an eternal aspect to the thoroughly
temporal nature of concrete process. Without it, there would be neither
perishing nor novelty, for the metaphysical role of the eternal object
is to link those two sides of the processual swinging. Eternal objects
account for the functioning of transition without positing another
distinct kind of actuality that would intervene between perished
satisfaction and novelty in becoming. They are a methodological
abstraction from the real potentiality that bookends either side of
actuality and suffuses its real internal synthesis. Or as Allan himself
explains Whitehead\'s account of the singular achievement of an
entity\'s subjective aim: \"These references to the timeless, the
ultimate, and the eternal do not imply any reality independent of
temporal becoming and perishing, however. Creativity is the ultimate
principle asserting the primacy of temporal process\" (339).

One approach I consider capable of eliminating the need for eternal
objects would be to argue that there is no such thing as an entity that
\"does not involve a necessary reference to any definite actual entities
of the temporal world\" (_PR_ 44). For in the case of conceptual
valuation, whereby some general potential is felt without strict
reference to a singular occasion in the actual world, it would still be
the case that that feeling has its own necessity rooted in the
satisfaction to which it contributes. Conceptual feeling, of which an
eternal object is the object, _does_ \"involve necessary reference\" to
a \"definite actual entit\[y\] of the temporal world,\" namely the one
that finally feels it.

I also agree with Allan\'s criticism that with Whitehead\'s God, the
eternal object\'s \"relational features are purely extrinsic\" (332). He
maintains the importance of the categoreal obligation of Conceptual
Reversion, which he explains as the manner by which concrescence
introduces a \"new kind of possible unity\" (340). It achieves this \"by
interpreting the divergent conceptual feelings as version of a more
general or more fundamental possibility\" (340). In other words, instead
of having recourse to God for an eternal object that would allow for the
necessary contrast, the actual entity, by virtue of the creative process
that it is, already has the resources for the conceptual
complexification that becomes a contrast. In my article on
\"Interstitial Life,\" I similarly argue for an implicated relationality
inspired by the differential logic of structural linguistics. Its
relationality is not a \"real togetherness\" in the sense of
concrescence (_PR_ 32, qtd. in Allan 332). But a tacit, or potential,
relationality that depends on being felt together with other conceptual
feelings. This does not replace God\'s provision of the ordering of
eternal objects\' relevance to the best satisfaction of a subjective
aim. That function is simply unnecessary. Relevance is pragmatic, not
timeless and total. It can be proposed, attempted, and compared over the
course of historic routes of occasions. Some sort of object for feeling
that is not necessarily in reference to any particular actual entity is
required in order to account for \"possibilities never before
entertained\" (Allan 335). Having never been entertained, such
possibilities are not, counter to Allan\'s assumption, \"available,
potent features of the realities impinging on the present.\" They must
be derived via the phases of concrescence through the conceptual
recognition of potentials, possibly their reversion to more general
definitions of potential, and via feelings of contrast.

Finally, to return to the issue of \"immediate predecessors,\" Allan, in
his reading of _Adventures of Ideas_, gives an account of the becoming
of novel entities in line with Whitehead\'s \"settled world.\"

> \"The \'Reality\' from which this new occasion emerges is \'the
> past,\' which is composed of \'diverse individual occasions.\' This
> Reality is an \'initiating\' power, an \'energizing\' force—the
> originating impetus of the process of concrescence. The past is
> described not merely as an inheritance, a passive lump of brute fact
> that must be taken into account. It is a vector force calling forth
> the new concrescence. This process is then \'urged onward\' by the
> operation of the occasion\'s mental pole, which provides \'conceptual
> subject-matter for synthesis with the Reality\'\" (349; citations are
> to p.281 of _AI_).

What determines the creation of novel occasions? We know that novel
occasions become. But Whitehead does not, to my knowledge, attempt to
explain whether there is a one-for-one vector from perished superject to
novel subject. Perhaps, however, there is a clue in his assertion that
while an actual entity does not require a preceding entity, it does
necessitate a subsequent one. It is at least the case that every actual
occasion is superceded by one actual entity. I interpret Whitehead to be
saying that with the satisfaction of concrescence, that superject\'s
vector feeling of its future incites its own recreation. Given the
underdeveloped character of Whitehead\'s claim, this interpretation is
not necessarily correct, though it does seem to accord with the
overwhelming stability and continuity of our experience. It also lends
credence to Allan\'s notion of \"immediate predecessors.\"

Let us widen the interpretation. Could a satisfaction be followed by
more than one novel becoming? Could one entity fulfill this requirement
for multiple superjects? Perhaps---though what is of greater interest to
me is the possibility that an actual entity could correspond to multiple
satisfactions that were contemporaries of one another. If possible, then
would it occur for every possible combination of contemporary perished
occasions? Or would there need to be a condition met for such composite
incitation? (For instance, two contemporary subjects could, via
presentational immediacy, project one another to an accurate enough
degree that their propositions for consequent feeling align.)

Alternatively, would an entity without an explicit precedent be
possible? Would it lack a valuative content in its physical prehension
of its actual world, since its perspective would not be dedicated, as it
were, to any particular past occasion? What would such an entity finally
feel? Everything evenly? In order to maintain the positive prehension of
the entire settled world, it would be incapable of subordinating any
data to any other and thus would diminish the importance of the
multiplicity of potential patterns for definiteness to the bare
remainder of actuality as such. Such an entity would concretely feel the
opening to Hegel\'s _Science of Logic_: \"Being, pure being---without
any further determination,\" which \"is in fact _nothing_.\" \"_Nothing,
pure nothing_: it is simply equality with itself, complete emptiness,
absence of all determination and content\" (Hegel, trans. Miller, 82). I
think not, because even without a subjective aim lured to feeling by a
particular superject, this entity would still be swayed by the intensity
of its actual world\'s superjects. It is not _ex nihilo_ but _ex
omnibus_. Could such an entity become? It sounds similar to the
consequent nature of God; except, instead of being a container that
iteratively expands through the recurrent unifications of itself, it is
temporal entity that doubles the rest of existence with no individuality
of its own. I can imagine equating its synthesis to a total accounting
of all the contemporary entities in their disjunctive unity as novel
real potentiality. But then, that is what the settled world is: a
tensed, ephemeral unity that is nothing without its supercession by
novel processes. Such an entity makes no sense. Moreover, like all
actual entities, it would incite a novel becoming transcending it;
thereby obviating the creation of a novelty without immediate
predecessor---unless, of course, another entity _ex omnibus_ were to
become. Why would it not, if one ever did? Well, I think that for a
creature to become without preference to its actual world is akin to
having no subjective aim, to lacking a conceptual pole, and thus to
mechanistic determinism.
